[Ready for Review] Conflict of Interest in Peer Review (#3928)
the-turing-way/the-turing-way: book/website/communication/peer-review/peer-review-conflicts.md

(cm-pr-conflicts)=
# Conflict of Interest

> 

Reviewer: This page might benefit from a short introduction about what the article introduces, something like: "This page will discuss examples of conflicts of interest in the context of research and academic publishing. "

Reviewer: Looks great!

## Context

> Imagine if a researcher for a national institute with a secondment at a climate consulting business publishes a paper about the categorisation of a hurricane speed and suggests a re categorisation plus a novel fast-track detection with a data-driven method. 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Imagine if a researcher for a national institute with a secondment at a climate consulting business publishes a paper about the categorisation of a hurricane speed and suggests a re-categorisation plus a novel fast-track detection with a data-driven method. 
```

> Then, we later find out that the editor of the paper also works for the same consulting company and the solution being suggested uses the editors’ patent. 

Author: Agree - Glad to hear about your advocate role in Climate Change. I've simplified the context section with your example. Thank you!

And that the researcher of the paper never mentions as part of a standard disclosure that the company (and potentially the author) has a major financial stake in the research outcomes. 
Believe it or not this is a common problem in scientific publishing, and raises the relevance of declaring the so-called conflict of interest {cite:ps}`weinkle2024coi`.

## What?
To maintain trust and integrity of scientific publishing in the global era, it is imperative to identify conflicting biases (conscious or unconscious) across all participants in the peer-reviewed publication process - including peer reviewers, editors, and the editorial board members of the journals. 

> A “conflict of interest” or “competing interest” (COI) refers to situations that are, or could be perceived to interfere with the objective presentation, review, or publication of a piece of work {cite:ps}`DeGruyter2024coi`.

Author: This is an excellent point. I've added the sentence stressing the perception of conflict. Thank you!

* Grants to the author or organisation
* Personal fees (honoraria, consulting fees, lecture fees)
* Intellectual property (patents, copyrights, royalties)
* Stock or share ownership
* Benefits related to the development of products

### Examples of non-financial conflict of interest: 
* Gifts (equipment, tools, software)
* Access to data repositories
* Holding a position on boards
* Close relationships with editors at the journal
* Competing interests (personal, political, religious, academic)
* Involvement in legal action (paper retraction)

## Use cases
We present below some use cases where the scientific and public communities/initiatives have flagged potential COI, and how the editorial team has handled the situation.

### Examples in Peer Review: 
The [Committee on Publication Ethics (COPE)](https://publicationethics.org) provides a diverse number of anonymized cases with COI in scientific publications. 
COPE Forum is a useful platform to discuss a publication ethics case with the wider scientific community with different anonymized use cases available [here](https://publicationethics.org/guidance/Case?t=conflict&classification%5B%5D=2774&sort=date). 

> We present below one of the most recent resolved cases {cite:ps}`cope2023coi`:

Reviewer 2: I'm not sure what the Turing Way's policy on this is, but since the below section is copied (almost) verbatim from the COPE Forum, should it be block quoted?

Author: @aleesteele may I ask which is the best practice when copying external use cases? shall I rephrase it?

##### Advice
The presenter of the case informed the Forum that the journal had challenged both the authors and the reviewer on their failure to disclose relevant conflicts of interest. 
The authors stated that they had not known when they recommended the reviewer that this person had links with the company. The reviewer confirmed this, and also said that they had not been involved in the work which produced the paper; thus they had felt that there was no conflict.
The Forum agreed that the reviewer did have an interest which should have been declared. They should either have raised this with the editor, allowing the journal to make a decision on how to handle the situation, or declined to write a review.
The editors should dismiss this review and seek a replacement if their policy is to have three reviews per paper, or go ahead with the two remaining reports. They should also provide some education for the reviewer on conflicts of interest.

##### Follow-up
The journal added a note to the paper from the editor-in-chief, stating that due to an unfortunate technical mistake when handling the article, one of the authors was also a subject editor at the same time. 

> The editor-in-chief also stated that he guaranteed that the scientific standards and honesty had not been violated in any way.

Reviewer 2: This doesn't match the follow up currently on the case studies website, did it get accidentially swapped?

Here's what's on COPE's site:

> #### Follow up: 
> The editors decided that the reviewer had made an honest mistake and have closed the case.

Author: Fixed. Thanks!

### Examples in Open Peer Review: 
There are also examples of COI in open peer review, where we could find other types of conflicts that occur and make them accountable.

> We provide below some examples in the open-source community:

Reviewer: Maybe add some context here, "...some examples in the open source community due to XYZ..."

(cm-pr-conflicts)=
# Conflict of Interest

This section provides introduces and provides examples of conflicts of interest in the context of research and academic publishing. 

## Context
Imagine if a researcher with a second job at a consulting business publishes a paper that shows increased positive outcomes from certain approaches in their field. 
Later we find out that the consulting business actively promotes and sells those approaches.

> Believe it or not this is a common problem in scientific publishing, and raises the relevance of declaring the so-called conflict of interest {cite:ps}`weinkle2024coi`.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
Believe it or not, this is a common problem in scientific publishing, and raises the relevance of declaring the so-called conflict of interest {cite:ps}`weinkle2024coi`.
```

## What?

> To maintain trust and integrity of scientific publishing in the global era, it is imperative to identify conflicting biases (conscious or unconscious) across all participants in the peer-reviewed publication process - including peer reviewers, editors, and the editorial board members of the journals. 

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
To maintain trust and integrity of scientific publishing, it is imperative to identify conflicting biases (conscious or unconscious) across all participants in the peer-reviewed publication process - including peer reviewers, editors, and the editorial board members of the journals. 
```

> A “conflict of interest” or “competing interest” (COI) refers to situations that are, or could be perceived to interfere with the objective presentation, review, or publication of a piece of work {cite:ps}`DeGruyter2024coi`.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
A “competing interest” or “conflict of interest” (COI) refers to situations that are, or could be perceived to interfere with the objective presentation, review, or publication of a piece of work {cite:ps}`DeGruyter2024coi`.
```

Perhaps also a sentence on how objectivity is a thing that is difficult to achieve anyway since research is carried out by humans?

* Stock or share ownership
* Benefits related to the development of products

### Examples of non-financial conflict of interest: 
* Gifts (equipment, tools, software)
* Access to data repositories
* Holding a position on boards
* Close relationships with editors at the journal
* Competing interests (personal, political, religious, academic)
* Involvement in legal action (paper retraction)

## Use cases
We present below some use cases where the scientific and public communities/initiatives have flagged potential COI, and how the editorial team has handled the situation.

### Examples in Peer Review: 
The [Committee on Publication Ethics (COPE)](https://publicationethics.org) provides a diverse number of anonymized cases with COI in scientific publications. 
COPE Forum is a useful platform to discuss a publication ethics case with the wider scientific community with different anonymized use cases available [here](https://publicationethics.org/guidance/Case?t=conflict&classification%5B%5D=2774&sort=date). 
We present below one of the most recent resolved cases {cite:ps}`cope2023coi`:

#### Handling undisclosed peer reviewer conflict
##### Context

> Some authors from a company recommended a peer reviewer on submitting their manuscript, who was then asked to review the manuscript. 

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
Some authors from a company submitted a manuscript to a journal and then recommended a peer reviewer, who was then asked to review the manuscript. 
```

This reviewer recommended acceptance without change. 
One other reviewer recommended major revision (a methodological reviewer not a content expert) and the third reviewer recommended rejection. 

> The editor found it unusual for a review to recommend acceptance without change so looked up this reviewer and found a manuscript in press at another journal where the reviewer, as an author, disclosed relationships with the same company the authors work at. 

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
The editor found it unusual for a review to recommend acceptance without change so they investigated this reviewer and found a manuscript in press at another journal where the reviewer, as an author, disclosed relationships with the same company the authors work at. 
```

> These included honoraria, consultant fees, and advisory board participation. The manuscript in press indeed was about the same drug covered in the submission. 

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
These relationships to the company included honoraria, consultant fees, and advisory board participation. 
The manuscript in press indeed was about the same drug covered in the submission. 
```

> The reviewer answered "no" to the question asked during the peer review process on whether they had any conflicts of interest related to the research. The editor confirmed the reviewer had a valid email address.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
The reviewer answered "no" to the question asked during the peer review process on whether they had any conflicts of interest related to the research. 
```
Not sure how that last part about the email address is relevant for the COI?

##### Question to the Forum
What process should be undertaken when a peer reviewer does not disclose their relationships with a company, provides a suspicious review, and at the same time, where the authors (who are employed by this company) recommended that peer reviewer in the first place?

##### Advice
The presenter of the case informed the Forum that the journal had challenged both the authors and the reviewer on their failure to disclose relevant conflicts of interest. 
The authors stated that they had not known when they recommended the reviewer that this person had links with the company. The reviewer confirmed this, and also said that they had not been involved in the work which produced the paper; thus they had felt that there was no conflict.
The Forum agreed that the reviewer did have an interest which should have been declared. They should either have raised this with the editor, allowing the journal to make a decision on how to handle the situation, or declined to write a review.

> The editors should dismiss this review and seek a replacement if their policy is to have three reviews per paper, or go ahead with the two remaining reports. They should also provide some education for the reviewer on conflicts of interest.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
The editors should dismiss this review and seek a replacement if their policy is to have three reviews per paper, or go ahead with the two remaining reports. 
They should also provide some education for the reviewer and authors on conflicts of interest.
```

* Environmental Data Science Book (EDS book): a reviewer of a notebook submission raised a [potential COI](https://github.com/alan-turing-institute/environmental-ds-book/issues/236#issuecomment-2021527918) because of a shared affiliation between the editor-in-chief who acted as an editor and authors of an open-source tool showcased in the notebook. The immediate follow-up was assigning a different editor to handle the revision of the submission.

### Examples of COI policies
Journals usually indicate their COI policies through a dedicated section on ethical guidelines/declarations. 
COI policies largely vary by domain and community. 
Some journals have specific requirements about what interests must be disclosed and the date range that you need to include (for example conflicts over the past 3 years). 
The table below provides an example of some policies in peer-reviewed journals and other sectors for different research outputs.

> | Journal / Initiative                                             | Domain  | Research product     | Policy                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         | Specific requirements (time)                                                         |

Reviewer 3: I would here remove the policy column and add the links to the policy in the first column to the names of the initiatives: right now the links are quite distracting because it is a lot of text, and you already know that the policies are present as you write above: the table below provides an example of some policies. 
Let me know if that doesn't make any sense!
